---
title: 'EXPLAIN plan comparison'
backlink_href: /docs/explain/
backlink_title: 'Documentation: EXPLAIN - Overview'
---

import explainComparison from './explain-comparison.png'

import explainComparisonSelection from './explain-comparison-selection.png'

export const ImgExplainComparison = () => <img src={explainComparison} alt="Explain comparison example" />

export const ImgExplainComparisonSelection = () => <img src={explainComparisonSelection} alt="Explain comparison selection example" />

Here we first describe best practices for comparing EXPLAIN plans in Postgres,
and then show the Plan Comparison feature in pganalyze.

In the course of analyzing query performance, you will typically need to compare
EXPLAIN plans at some point. Plans can be obtained with the [EXPLAIN
command](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/17/using-explain.html) or with the
[`auto_explain`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auto-explain.html)
module.

Conceptually, one can focus on either the overall plan shape or on the
differences in execution metrics across matching nodes in two different plans.


## Comparison basics

Generally speaking, there are no "good plans" and "bad plans" in Postgres. There
are only plans that may be more or less appropriate for a given query. A
sequential scan is more efficient and faster than an index scan when most of the
data in a table is required to answer a query.

To compare two plans, it's important to understand why Postgres chooses a
certain plan (which comes down to costs) and what alternate options are
available.


## Plan shape

Plans can vary significantly across different executions of the same query. The
most impactful differences are generally in the [scan
nodes](/docs/explain/scan-nodes) and [join nodes](/docs/explain/join-nodes)
selected for the plan. If you're trying to understand performance differences
between plans, it's best to start with those nodes.


## Plan metrics

EXPLAIN plans, especially ones gathered with the `BUFFERS` option, can be compared on
a number of different metrics. Different metrics give different insights into
the plans being compared:

 - Cost: the cost to execute this node, as estimated by the planner
 - Runtime: the total time it took to execute this node (requires [`auto_explain.log_timing`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auto-explain.html#AUTO-EXPLAIN-CONFIGURATION-PARAMETERS-LOG-TIMING) for `auto_explain` plans)
 - I/O Time: the total time this node spent performing I/O (requires [`track_io_timing`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/runtime-config-statistics.html#GUC-TRACK-IO-TIMING) on)
 - Rows: the total rows returned by this node
 - Buffers: the total number of pages read from either disk or the OS page cache
   (read) or found in [`shared_buffers`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/runtime-config-resource.html#GUC-SHARED-BUFFERS)
   (requires the `BUFFERS` option for `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`, or the [`auto_explain.log_buffers`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auto-explain.html#AUTO-EXPLAIN-CONFIGURATION-PARAMETERS-LOG-BUFFERS) option for `auto_explain`)

All these metrics except row counts include the cumulative values from child
nodes in standard EXPLAIN output.


### Cost

This is a useful metric to understand the planner's "reasoning" for choosing
what may be an inefficient plan. The planner determines cost based on statistics
about the selectivity of query filters, information about the table, its data,
and its indexes gathered by
[ANALYZE](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/17/sql-analyze.html) (both manual and
through autovacuum); [extended
statistics](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-createstatistics.html);
planner [configuration
settings](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/runtime-config-query.html#RUNTIME-CONFIG-QUERY);
and derived estimates and heuristics.


### Runtime

The execution time of the plan node, or the overall query. Note this excludes
planning time and time spent waiting for locks. This is usually the most
relevant metric overall: this determines query latency, and is ultimately what
you will be trying to optimize.


### I/O Time

The running time of expensive queries that read a lot of data from disk is
usually I/O bound. Given the limited memory usage accounting available (see the
[Buffers](#buffers) section), actual time spent doing I/O is a good proxy for
buffers read.

Note that this metric will vary depending on how much of the data needed by the
query is already cached: if you are looking at `auto_explain` output, that will
record how long the I/O took for that particular execution. But if you re-run
the query with `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`, a different portion of the table data may now
be in cache, so the I/O timing may not be comparable. You may want to review the
[buffer cache statistics](/docs/schema-statistics/buffer-cache) for the tables
involved to have a better understanding of differences in timing.

I/O timing is also useful if you can perform a cold cache test. To run a cold
cache test, you'll need to restart Postgres and clear the OS page cache (see,
e.g., [these instructions for
Linux](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/sysctl/vm.html#drop-caches)).


### Rows

Row count statistics can be useful to track down where a lot of data is
discarded when evaluating a plan. Look for child nodes with a much larger row
count than their parent nodes. Reading more data than necessary is a common
query plan inefficiency. A common example of this is queries with a small `LIMIT
x` and large `OFFSET y`: typically, these must read `x + y` rows, even though
they only return `x`.


### Buffers

Since I/O timing can be hard to test, you can instead look at the amount of data
being processed. This requires the
[`BUFFERS`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-explain.html) option to
`EXPLAIN` or
[`auto_explain.log_buffers`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/auto-explain.html#AUTO-EXPLAIN-CONFIGURATION-PARAMETERS-LOG-BUFFERS)
for `auto_explain`.

The `BUFFERS` option will report buffers hit, read, dirtied, and written. It
breaks this into three categories: shared, local, and temp. For comparing buffer
usage for most queries, it's best to focus on the amout of table and temp table
data read from disk or found in cache. This is represented by shared and local
buffers hit and read (see the `BUFFERS` documentation linked above for details),
and you can use this as a proxy for the I/O efficiency of the query plan.

Unfortunately, the `BUFFERS` option does not count unique buffer accesses: it
counts the total number of accesses. Queries that read the same pages of data
over and over (e.g., ones involving [nested loop joins](join-nodes/nested-loop))
can end up over-counting buffer usage.


## Plan Comparison in pganalyze

You can access the Plan Comparison view from a few different places in pganalyze:

 - the Plan Samples panel on the EXPLAIN Plans tab of the detail page for a particular query
 - the Compare Plans button on the detail view for a specific plan
 - the Overview page of a Workbook

All of these have a list of plans with checkboxes. Select two and press "Compare
Plans" to start a comparison.

<ImgExplainComparisonSelection />
<br />

The comparison itself consists of a diff-like view of the two different plan
shapes, a metric selector and stats for the selected metric, and a sidebar for
additional information:

<ImgExplainComparison />
<br />

A summary of both plans is available in the sidebar on the right. Below the
summary, there's a comparison of the index usage of these plans: all indexes
used by either plan are listed, with a checkmark in the A column if the index is
used by the first plan, and a checkmark in the B column if the index is used by
the second plan. In the main plan diff view, indexes are referenced by footnote.

Nodes that scan tables, views, or set-returning functions include the table,
view, or function name next to the node name in a lighter color. It may be
truncated, but you can hover over the node to see the full name.

Subplans that are essentially executed separately in Postgres are split out into
a separate section of the diff, below the main plan. Plan nodes that scan these
subplans include the subplan name next to the plan node, just like table scans.

Clicking on a node in the diff view in either plan A or plan B will update the
sidebar to show the details for that plan node. You can click Node Source to
view the full JSON source for that node.

You can select a comparison metric at the top to see per-node comparisons
according to that metric: all the metrics described [above](#plan-metrics) are
supported.

Note that the Buffers metric is a combination of shared and local buffers hit
and read, as in the [Buffers](#buffers) section.
