---
title: 'Index Advisor: Getting Started'
backlink_href: /docs/index-advisor
backlink_title: 'Index Advisor (in-app in pganalyze)'
---

The pganalyze Index Advisor is a tool to analyze your queries, determine how
Postgres will fetch data from the tables referenced, and suggest indexes to make
those scans more efficient. The Index Advisor uses information pganalyze already
collects about your schema and queries in order to provide an analysis for any
table and query.

The new version of the Index Advisor considers the whole database when it
creates opportunities. We do not recommend adding indexes to every query as it
influences database performance, especially I/O. Rather, we recommend *good
enough* indexes that strike the balance between performance and operational
efficiency.

The Index Advisor is powered by the pganalyze [Indexing
Engine](/docs/indexing-engine), and you can read about its internals if you want
to understand all the details. It's especially important to be aware of the
[limitations](/docs/indexing-engine/limitations) of the Indexing Engine in order
to use the Index Advisor effectively.

![Overview of the Index Advisor](/overview.png)


## What you get with Index Advisor

 - Save time manually creating indexes for Postgres queries, develop a holistic
   indexing strategy for your databases instead
 - We try out 100s of different index combinations, and present the very best to
   you
 - Each missing index opportunity comes with the “CREATE INDEX” command and
   statistics for affected queries, so you can test and reason easily about it
 - Optimize for the smallest amount of total I/O required to fulfill the queries
   in the system
 - Supported by a small number of good enough indexes for each table, that have
   as few columns as possible, to keep Index Write Overhead as low as reasonable

First you onboard a new database if you have not yet. Next, you'll want to
navigate to Index Advisor to view missing and unused index opportunities. It can
take up to 24 hours for opportunities to show up in the UI.

Optionally, you can [set up alerts](/docs/checks) and we will let you know when
we find new opportunities.

## Enable the column stats helper for even better recommendations

Column statistics are used by pganalyze to improve Index Advisor
recommendations. For best results, make sure you are running collector 0.41.2 or
later, and [set up the get_column_stats helper
function](/docs/install/troubleshooting/column_stats_helper).


## How to navigate the opportunities overview

![Overview of missing index opportunities](/missing-index-list.png)

At the top of the overview page you find KPIs that frame our opportunity
findings for you. You can reference the same metrics when you look into the
missing and unused index opportunities below.

<dl>
  <dt>Total Data Size</dt>
  <dd>The total data size across all tables in your database.</dd>
  <dt>Total Index Size</dt>
  <dd>The total index size across all indexes in your database.</dd>
  <dt>Total Table Writes</dt>
  <dd>
    The number of tables writes (inserts and updates) per second in your
    database.
  </dd>
  <dt>Avg. Index Write Overhead</dt>
  <dd>
    The average index write overhead across all indexes in your database. Learn
    more about our Index Write Overhead metric
    [here](/docs/indexing-engine/index-write-overhead).
  </dd>
</dl>


## View all opportunities for your databases

Opportunities are listed below and split into two types: Missing indexes and
unused indexes. By default opportunities are sorted by impact which lets you
quickly decide what you want to review first.

### Missing indexes

Detects scans on tables that have potential to be improved on cost by adding an
index. We look at all the queries and the scan that are contained within the
queries, then filter out clauses, and based on that determine if an index would
make sense (see more details in the [Indexing Engine documentation](/docs/indexing-engine)).

The impact of a missing index opportunity is measured by cost improvement.

### Unused indexes

Every index causes additional write overhead, and sometimes indexes are created
but then never used in reality. The unused index check detects indexes that
haven't been used in the last 2 weeks, as determined by Postgres statistics, and
notes these indexes as potentially being candidates for removal.

The impact of an unused index opportunity is measured by reduced Index Write Overhead.

In addition to these checks that are performed as part of the Index Advisor,
pganalyze can also help you alert on [invalid
indexes](/docs/checks/schema/index_invalid).

From the overview page you can click through to issue pages that explain in
detail why Index Advisor created an opportunity.
