---
title: 'Index Advisor: How to Reason About Missing Index Opportunities'
backlink_href: /docs/index-advisor
backlink_title: 'Index Advisor (in-app in pganalyze)'
---

![With our recommendations we also give you all the context you need to reason about them](/missing-index-detail.png)

Index Advisor creates [issues](/docs/checks) for newly detected opportunities.
They give you details on the opportunity, the root cause and analysis of data
that Index Advisor does. When reasoning about an index recommendation you want
to look at existing indexes on the table, queries affected, and table scans.

Different variants of indexes are tried during the Index Advisor recommendation
process that produces the lowest cost (and thus the lowest estimated I/O). When
Index Advisor finds a recommendation, it will show an expected cost improvement.

The cost improvement is an average across the individual cost improvements for
each scan that can benefit from the query, weighted by the frequency of the scan
(based on the queries that contain the scan). More frequent queries will have a
more significant impact on the overall weighted cost improvement.


## Table scans

![](/scans.png)

On both, specific index opportunities and the table and query pages, you will
see a new section called “Scans”. Each scan has an associated estimated cost
that is averaged across all queries it is referenced in. For more information
about how this works, [read our documentation
here](/docs/indexing-engine/query-to-scan-breakdown).

Here is how you would reason about what you see see on the Scans list on the
Index Advisor opportunity page: each scan expression includes information about

 - the current cost,
 - estimated scans per minute,
 - and estimated cost improvement if you were to apply the recommendation.

Cost improvements are expressed as a multiplier, for example, 1.2x than the old
estimated cost—the table sorts by cost improvement.


## Affected queries

![](/affected-queries.png)

Affected queries include all queries on a particular table that contain at least
one condition in their WHERE or JOIN clause that would be affected by the index
recommendation, e.g. because an indexed column is also used as a filter
condition in the WHERE clause.


## Existing indexes

![](/existing-indexes.png)

To reason about recommendations, the Index Advisor opportunity page also shows
all existing indexes on the table, to make interpretation of the recommendation
easier.
