---
title: 'What is Freezing?'
backlink_href: /docs/vacuum-advisor
backlink_title: 'VACUUM Advisor'
---

In Postgres, freezing refers to a process of updating transaction metadata
for older rows to allow reuse of related transaction IDs.


## Why is freezing necessary?

In Postgres, every row contains some associated metadata, including information
about the ID of the transaction that created it. This is due to [the MVCC
mechanism](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/mvcc-intro.html) that
Postgres uses to support concurrent transactions. Since Postgres uses a 32-bit
circular transaction ID space, those older IDs must be reused eventually. In
order to avoid amibguity about which concrete transaction an ID refers to (known
as "transaction ID wraparound"), the metadata of older rows must be updated to
reference a special "frozen" transaction ID that is visible to all transactions
before their transaction IDs are reused. The oldest unfrozen transaction ID for
each table is maintained in the pg_class catalog table.

VACUUM allows Postgres to reclaim the transaction IDs of these older rows and
reuse them for future transactions. Autovacuum is designed to perform VACUUM
regularly in order to efficiently freeze older rows. Note that to avoid excess
write I/O, freezing is an optional part of vacuuming, controlled by separate
configuration settings. When freezing does occur, VACUUM writes out new pages
with the row metadata updated to reference the frozen transaction ID.

Note that the same concepts apply to multixact IDs, a separate set of IDs that
Postgres uses to implement row-level locking.


## Freezing safeguards

Because transaction ID wraparound would lead to data corruption, Postgres has a
number of safeguards that ensure a database is extremely unlikely to actually
reach wraparound. First of all, if the age of the oldest unfrozen transaction ID
exceeds `autovacuum_freeze_max_age`, Postgres will launch an autovacuum "to
prevent wraparound". This will not cede locks like regular autovacuum, and is
not cancellable by unprivileged users, but will obey cost limits and otherwise
behaves like a standard VACUUM.

If the age exceeds `vacuum_failsafe_age`, Postgres will "upgrade" a running
VACUUM to a "failsafe" VACUUM. This will ignore cost limits and skip vacuuming
indexes in order to get freezing under control.

If this still fails and the system has only 3M transaction IDs remaining,
Postgres will shut down and require manual intervention to recover in "single
user mode". This almost never happens due to the above safeguards.


## Freezing trade-offs

Freezing is controlled by a number of configuration settings, but it's helpful
to understand the general trade-offs at a high level before diving into details.
In general, freezing is controlled by the age of the oldest unfrozen transaction
ID. There are two extremes of when to freeze rows: As early as possible, or as
late as possible.

Freezing rows as early as possible spreads out the I/O load from writing out
frozen pages, since it avoids building a backlog of rows to freeze. But it means
that frequently updated rows may need to be frozen many times. It can also lead
to having to freeze rows that later end up being deleted.

Conversely, freezing as late as possible avoids repeatedly freezing the same
rows (and deleted rows). But it accrues "freezing debt" and may mean that large
portions of the tables being vacuumed may need to be written out as frozen all
during the same vacuum pass. This can have substantial I/O impact and can slow
progress of that VACUUM, delaying cleanup of bloat. It can also occupy an
autovacuum worker for an extended period of time, preventing other tables from
being vacuumed promptly.


## Freezing strategy

Considering the above trade-offs, it's often difficult to determine how to
configure freezing. The best approach usually depends on your workload.

Many applications have a workload of "hot" data that's updated for a while and
then mostly sits at rest. Consider a system modeling orders placed by customers:
An order is updated as it is prepared, completed, paid for, shipped, and
delivered, but after that it is likely to never be updated again. If the order
rows are frozen too early, while the order is still being processed, they will
need to be frozen again after the order is next updated. For these tables, it's
best to delay freezing until most affected orders are expected to be "cold".

Conversely, many applications also have append-only workloads, where new data is
added to a table (often a partitioned table) and then never updated again. For
these tables, freezing can be more aggressive, since it will not be "undone" by
future updates.
